    
                                 Foreword   

Ada is the result of a collective effort to design a  common  language  for
programming large scale and real-time systems. 

The  common high order language program began in 1974.  The requirements of
the United States Department of Defense were  formalized  in  a  series  of
documents  which  were  extensively  reviewed  by  the Services, industrial
organizations, universities, and foreign  military  departments.   The  Ada
language  was  designed  in  accordance with the final (1978) form of these
requirements, embodied in the Steelman specification. 

The Ada design team was led  by Jean D.  Ichbiah  and  has  included  Bernd
Krieg-Brueckner,  Brian A. Wichmann, Henry F. Ledgard, Jean-Claude Heliard,
Jean-Loup Gailly, Jean-Raymond Abrial,  John  G.P.  Barnes,  Mike  Woodger,
Olivier Roubine, Paul N. Hilfinger, and Robert Firth. 

At  various  stages  of the project, several people closely associated with
the design team made major contributions.  They  include  J.B.  Goodenough,
R.F. Brender, M.W. Davis, G. Ferran, K. Lester, L. MacLaren, E. Morel, I.R.
Nassi, I.C. Pyle, S.A. Schuman, and S.C. Vestal. 

Two  parallel  efforts that were started in the second phase of this design
had a deep influence on the language.  One was the development of a  formal
definition  using  denotational  semantics,  with  the  participation of V.
Donzeau-Gouge, G. Kahn, and B. Lang.  The other was the design  of  a  test
translator  with the participation of K. Ripken, P. Boullier, P. Cadiou, J.
Holden, J.F. Hueras, R.G. Lange, and  D.T.  Cornhill.   The  entire  effort
benefitted from the dedicated assistance of Lyn Churchill and Marion Myers,
and  the  effective technical support of B. Gravem,  W.L. Heimerdinger, and
P. Cleve.  H.G. Schmitz served as program manager. 

Over the five years spent on this project, several intense week-long design  
reviews were conducted, with the participation of P. Belmont,  B.  Brosgol,
P. Cohen, R. Dewar, A. Evans, G. Fisher, H. Harte, A.L. Hisgen, P. Knueven,
M.  Kronental,  N.  Lomuto, E. Ploedereder, G. Seegmueller, V. Stenning, D.
Taffs, and also F. Belz,  R.  Converse,  K.  Correll,  A.N.  Habermann,  J.
Sammet, S. Squires, J. Teller, P. Wegner, and P.R. Wetherall. 

Several   persons   had  a  constructive  influence  with  their  comments,
criticisms and suggestions.  They include P. Brinch Hansen, G. Goos, C.A.R.
Hoare, Mark Rain, W.A. Wulf, and also E. Boebert, P. Bonnard,  H.  Clausen,
M.  Cox,  G.  Dismukes, R. Eachus, T. Froggatt, H. Ganzinger, C. Hewitt, S.
Kamin, R. Kotler, O. Lecarme,  J.A.N.  Lee,  J.L.  Mansion,  F.  Minel,  T.
Phinney,  J. Roehrich, V. Schneider, A. Singer, D. Slosberg, I.C. Wand, the
reviewers of Ada-Europe, AdaTech, Afcet, those of the LMSC review team, and
those of the Ada Tokyo Study Group. 

These reviews and comments, the numerous evaluation reports received at the
end of the first and second phase, the nine hundred language issue  reports
and  test  and evaluation reports received from fifteen different countries
during the third phase of the project, the thousands of  comments  received
during  the  ANSI Canvass, and the on-going work of the IFIP Working Group
2.4 on system implementation languages and that of the Purdue Europe LTPL-E          
committee, all had a substantial influence on the final definition of  Ada. 

The Military Departments and Agencies have provided a broad base of support
including    funding,   extensive   reviews,   and   countless   individual
contributions by the members of the High Order Language Working  Group  and
other  interested  personnel.   In particular, William A. Whitaker provided
leadership for the program during the formative stages.   David  A.  Fisher   
was  responsible  for  the  successful  development  and  refinement of the
language requirement documents that led to the Steelman specification. 

This language definition was developed by  Cii  Honeywell  Bull  and  later
Alsys,  and by Honeywell Systems and Research Center, under contract to the
United States Department of Defense.  William E. Carlson and later Larry E.
Druffel served as  the  technical  representatives  of  the  United  States
Government  and  effectively coordinated the efforts of all participants in
the Ada program.

