
                  15. Postscript : Submission of Comments   

This  postscript  is  not  part  of  the  standard  definition  of  the Ada
programming language. 

For submission of comments on this standard Ada reference manual, we  would
appreciate them being sent by Arpanet to the address 

     Ada-Comment at ECLB 

If you do not have Arpanet access, please send the comments by mail 

     Ada Joint Program Office
     Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Research and Engineering
     Washington, DC 20301
     United States of America. 

For mail comments, it will assist us if you are able to send them on 8-inch
single-sided  single-density  IBM  format  diskette  -  but even if you can
manage this, please also send us a paper copy, in  case  of  problems  with
reading the diskette. 

All  comments  are  sorted  and processed mechanically in order to simplify
their analysis and to facilitate giving them proper consideration.  To  aid
this  process you are kindly requested to precede each comment with a three
line header 

          !section ...
          !version 1983
          !topic ... 

The section line includes the section number, the paragraph number enclosed
in parentheses, your name or affiliation (or both), and  the  date  in  ISO
standard  form  (year-month-day).  The paragraph number is the one given in
the margin of the paper form of this document (it is not contained  in  the
ECLB  files);   paragraph  numbers  are  optional, but very helpful.  As an
example, here is the section line of comment #1194 on a  previous  version: 

          !section 03.02.01(12) D. Taffs 82-04-26 

The version line, for comments on the current standard, should only contain
"!version  1983".   Its  purpose  is  to  distinguish  comments that refer to
different versions. 

The topic line should contain a one line summary of the comment.  This line   
is essential, and you are kindly asked to avoid topics such  as  "Typo"  or
"Editorial comment" which will not convey any information when printed in a
table of contents.  As an example of an informative topic line consider: 

          !topic Subcomponents of constants are constants

Note  also  that  nothing  prevents  the  topic line from including all the
information of a comment, as in the following topic line: 

          !topic Insert:   "...  are  {implicitly}  defined  by  a  subtype
                            declaration"

As  a  final example here is a complete comment received on a prior version
of this manual: 

          !section 03.02.01(12) D. Taffs 82-04-26
          !version 10
          !topic Subcomponents of constants are constants

          Change "component" to "subcomponent" in the last sentence. 

          Otherwise the statement is inconsistent with the defined  use  of
          subcomponent  in  3.3, which says that subcomponents are excluded
          when the term component is used instead of subcomponent.                                           


